Add $urltransform modifier description (#489)
AdguardTeam/KnowledgeBase: docs/general/ad-filtering/create-own-filters.md

:::

#### **`urltransform`** {#urltransform-modifier}

> `$urltransform` rules allow to modify the request url by replacing text matched by regular expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `$urltransform` rules allow you to modify the request URL by replacing the text matched by the regular expression.
```

**Features**

> - `$urltransform` rules apply to any request url text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `$urltransform` rules apply to any request URL text.
```

> - `$urltransform` rules can also **modify the query part** of the url.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `$urltransform` rules can also **modify the query part** of the URL.
```

> - `$urltransform` will not be applied if original url get blocked by other rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `$urltransform` will not be applied if the original URL is blocked by other rules.
```

> - `$urltransform` will be applied before `$removeparam` rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `$urltransform` will be applied before `$removeparam` rules.
```

> `$urltransform` value can be empty in the case of exception rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `$urltransform` value can be empty for exception rules.
```

**Multiple rules matching a single request**

> In case if multiple `$urltransform` rules match a single request, we will apply each of them. **The order is defined alphabetically.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If multiple `$urltransform` rules match a single request, we will apply each of them. **The order is defined alphabetically.**
```

**Syntax**

`$urltransform` syntax is similar to replacement with regular expressions [in Perl](http://perldoc.perl.org/perlrequick.html#Search-and-replace).

```text
urltransform = "/" regexp "/" replacement "/" modifiers
```

- **`regexp`** — a regular expression.
- **`replacement`** — a string that will be used to replace the string corresponding to `regexp`.
- **`modifiers`** — a regular expression flags. For example, `i` — insensitive search, or `s` — single-line mode.

> In the `$urltransform` value, two characters must be escaped: comma `,` and dollar sign `$`. Use backslash `\` for it. For example, an escaped comma looks like this: `\,`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `$urltransform` value, two characters must be escaped: the comma `,` and the dollar sign `$`. Use the backslash character `\` for this. For example, an escaped comma looks like this: `\,`.
```

**Examples**

```adblock
||example.org^$urltransform=/(pref\/).*\/(suf)/\$1\$2/i
```

There are three parts in this rule:

- `regexp` — `(pref\/).*\/(suf)`;
- `replacement` — `\$1\$2` where `$` is escaped;
- `modifiers` — `i` for insensitive search.

**Multiple `$urltransform` rules**

1. `||example.org^$urltransform=/X/Y/`
2. `||example.org^$urltransform=/Z/Y/`
3. `@@||example.org/page/*$urltransform=/Z/Y/`

- Both rule 1 and 2 will be applied to all requests sent to `example.org`.
- Rule 2 is disabled for requests matching `||example.org/page/`, **but rule 1 still works!**

> **Re-matching rules after transforming url**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Re-matching rules after transforming URL**
```

Reviewer: имеется в виду конкретный урл или просто какой-то? нужно поставить артикль — the для первого случая или a для второго

> If the `$urltransform` rule had beed applied to a request, it will be re-matched against the url filter again, because url text has been changed and we might want to block it.

Reviewer 2: What is a "url filter" here?

Do you mean that ALL rules will be re-evaluated?

Author: `url filter` is responsible for matching requests against rules. `$urltransform` is the most priority rule to be applied to a request. And if it is applied, the url can become completely different, thus we need to build a new rules matching against this new url because there is likely a different set of rules for it. None of the rules are re-evaluated because there are no rules applied (except `$urltransform`) at this point.

Author: Should we remove the mention about "url filter" to not confuse the user?

Reviewer 2: It'd be better to not use internal naming here and just say that all rules will be reevaluated against the new URL.

> If the `$urltransform` rule had beed applied to a request, it will be re-matched against the url filter again, because url text has been changed and we might want to block it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `$urltransform` rule has been applied to a request, it will be re-matched against the URL filter because the URL text has changed and we may want to block it.
```

Author: Кажется [вот сейчас](https://github.com/AdguardTeam/KnowledgeBase/pull/489/commits/7f50c1f75805041364259c9a083ea40bf636e38b) правильно. Или все таки `has been`?

Reviewer 3: Мне все же по этому контексту больше нравится вариант Лены, хотя вижу само предложение уже поменялось)

Reviewer: можно и с is

> E.x. with the following rules:

Reviewer: e.g.?

Reviewer: и ниже

```adblock
||example.com^$urltransform=/firstpath/secondpath/
||example.com/secondpath^
```

the request to `https://example.com/firstpath` will be blocked before it is sent.

> Howether, `$urltransform` rules will **not be re-applied** in this case to avoid infinite recursion, e.x. with the following rules:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, `$urltransform` rules will **not be re-applied** in this case to avoid infinite recursion, e.x. with the following rules:
```

```adblock
||example.com/firstpath^$urltransform=/firstpath/secondpath/
||example.com/secondpath^$urltransform=/secondpath/firstpath/
```

the request to `https://example.com/fisrtpath` will be transformed to `https://example.com/secondpath` and the second rule will not be applied.

**Disabling `$urltransform` rules**

- `@@||example.org^$urltransform` will disable all `$urltransform` rules matching `||example.org^`.
- `@@||example.org^$urltransform=/Z/Y/` will disable the rule with `$urltransform=/Z/Y/` for any request matching `||example.org^`.

`$urltransform` rules can also be disabled by `$document` and `$urlblock` exception rules. But basic exception rules without modifiers do not do that. For example, `@@||example.com^` will not disable `$urltransform=/X/Y/` for requests to **example.com**, but `@@||example.com^$urlblock` will.

:::caution Restrictions

> Rules with `$urltransform` modifier can be used [**only in trusted filters**](#trusted-filters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rules with the `$urltransform` modifier can be used [**only in trusted filters**](#trusted-filters).
```

:::

:::info Compatibility

> Rules with the `$urltransform` modifier are supported by AdGuard for Windows, Mac, and Android, **running CoreLibs version 1.15 or later**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rules with the `$urltransform` modifier are supported by AdGuard for Windows, AdGuard for Mac, and AdGuard for Android **with CoreLibs version 1.15 or higher**.
```

**Re-matching rules after transforming url**

> If the `$urltransform` rule is applied to a request, all the rules will be re-evaluated against the new url.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the `$urltransform` rule is applied to a request, all the rules will be re-evaluated against the new URL.
```
